All right, welcome back brave people.
Uh we are in the eighth lecture of the
experienced section of statistical
rethinking 2026. We're going to talk
about missing data and a particular kind
of missing data censored data. Today
this is a continuation of the themes
from the previous lecture where we
talked about measurement error. Um I
want to remind you that this these
lectures too uh is case where we see the
the value really of the basian approach.
uh these are measurement error and
missing data are routine problems in
almost all realistic data sets. Um
unless you are so lucky to work with the
perfect experiment
you have missing data, you have
measurement error and these are things
that are actually quite difficult to
deal with in other frameworks. Uh but
there are very direct solutions in the
basine approach and that's nice. Um I'm
just also just want to remind you
quickly that in this section the last
lecture will be on the 20th not on the
uh uh was it 13th I think it was going
to be because I will be coming back from
Cambridge. I apologize. Yeah. But I I
will give you your final lecture I
promise. Okay. Um let's start with a
meme. Uh a colleague of mine has a
student who made this meme. This
colleague teaches with my book in
lectures. uh just remind you one of the
things I always say in this course.
Maybe you've heard me say it. It's in
the book in various places is uh if
you're feeling confused, it's just
because you're paying you're trying to
understand or it's because you're paying
attention or sometimes I say it like uh
confusion is what thinking feels like,
right? And I believe those things, but I
understand that they're not always super
helpful. So I also try to like walk the
walk for you and get there. But uh this
is just to remind you if you are feeling
that way, you're not drowning.
[laughter] Okay? Um you're not actually
drowning. It's just that's what swimming
feels like. Okay? So it's uh we'll do
okay. All right. Uh again, continuing
the themes from the previous week, we
talked about measurement models as um an
addendum or companion, that's a better
word, to the generative model. Uh and
we're going to focus on missingness and
sensoring today. Okay, sensoring is a
particular type of missingness where we
have partial information about the
missing values and this is very routine.
Um, so missing data is super common. Uh,
I want you to kind of flip the script
here and think about most data is
missing most of the time, right?
Predictions are a kind of missing data.
Yeah, that's one way to think about it.
Uh, and retradictions are another kind
of missing data. But if you have a
generative model, you can um develop
probability distributions for these
things. Um
and uh
often we have partial information about
missing data like we know their
constraints because we know the type of
measurement even if we haven't observed
it yes yet. Um uh you know this is true
in a sense because you can you can
choose likelihood distributions for data
you haven't seen. And how do you do
that? You use the constraints on the
measurement. Right? I tell you
something's a count variable, you're
going to say, "Oh, I could use a plus
on." Right? Now, where did that
knowledge come from? It's not the
values, right? It's missing data. Uh,
but you know the constraints on the
variable and that lets you put a
probability distribution on them. And
then from that probably distribution,
you have a distribution of expectations
for the missing values. And that's the
key insight is that the probability
model or likelihood is a prior for the
observations. So when the observations
are observed, do we call it a
likelihood? And when they're not, it's a
prior. Yeah, I'll say that again. The
likelihood is a prior for the
observation or prior for the residuals,
right? The conditional observations uh
in the basian perspective.
Um uh and then the second thing that we
know about missing data is from the
generative model, the missing values
will have relationships with the other
variables. So if there are associations
between things and you have a missing
value, if you know the other values,
then you can update the expectations for
the missing values, make predictions
about them from the structural model. Uh
okay. Uh as you know, I'm really into
workflow. So we want to talk about the
workflow for making decisions about
missing data. In the first part of this
lecture, I want to walk you through an
abstract example of the different kinds
of missingness and relate them to DAGs
uh as an example to let you think
through. And the reason is often missing
data is ignorable.
Yeah. Have you ever done this? R will do
it for you automatically. It will just
it will just automatically ignore
missing data. It'll drop all the cases.
It does by default a thing called
complete case analysis. That's often
very justifiable actually, but sometimes
it's not. And so I want to give you a
principled workflow for deciding that.
And as you guessed it, it'll be based
upon a causal model of your variables.
Right? There's no inference without
assumptions about causation. Um but the
good news is often dropping cases of
missing values is entirely justifiable.
It's it's perfectly fine, but you should
justify it. Um sometimes it's not and we
have to do something else like
imputation.
um uh and imputation uh sometimes it's
not necessary but it's beneficial. It
give you more statistical efficiency
because you get to use um you're not
throwing away any data. You're using all
the in a complete case analysis you're
throwing away things you have measured
right because not all the columns are
missing. Uh if you do some imputation of
the missing values you can use the
things you have observed and sometimes
imputation is necessary to close back
doors which create systematic bias in
the estimates. um as as in the sensoring
example I'm going to talk about in the
second half of the lecture right where
it's not ignored the missingness is
never ignorable in a survival analysis
and I'll explain why using the abstract
example in the next slides okay let's
let's start with um a simple example we
imagine we have some students and they
have produced some homework
right um let's say some of the homework
goes missing it's not turned in and why
because the students say that their dog
ate the homework. Um, here's our DAG.
Uh, I mean, to reference the S is the
students, uh, some feature of the
student, like their ability. We're
trying to assess it through their
homework. We don't get to observe all
the homework because it hasn't all been
turned in. Instead, you observe a
vector. That's what the the circle
around it means, right? It's missing.
It's unobserved. We don't have the full
vector of homeworks. What we have
instead is H star, which is a partial
vector. It's a mix of observed values
and missing values. Yeah, that's what we
get quite often in real data. Um, and
the reason is that the students claim
that dogs ate their homework. All right,
so now just think about your own
research area and translate dog into
some other missingness mechanism, but uh
the I said I told you it would be an
abstract example. You can map this onto
your own ideas. Okay. Um, now how do you
decide if we want to estimate the um
abilities of the students for whom we do
have homework? Is it fine to do that
with the evidence we have at hand here?
Uh now your intuition says yes, of
course it is. But we we we want to go
beyond intuition, right? We want to
justify it. And in this case, you know
the rules of desparation. You are pros
at desparation, right? Yes. No, the
faces are saying no. [laughter]
We'll work on that. Yes, you are. You
are pros at desparation. You can do
this. You can do the back door criterion
with your eyeballs, right? And so that's
what we're going to do here. Are there
any backdoor paths? Um we want to
estimate uh um the the uh effect of the
student abilities on the quality of
their homework. So we look for biasing
paths connecting H to S. And there are
no backdoor paths in this stag. So
you're good. H star is a proxy of H. Um
but there are no there's no biasing pass
in this. So you're in good shape. This
is a case where dropping the missing
values and just doing complete case
analysis is perfectly fine. You
understand? Yeah. In a sense, it's
because the dogs are eating homework at
random. We haven't measured anything
about the dogs in this DAG that guides
them to eat some homework instead of
other. This is where I'm going next.
Does that make sense? It's just that
some dogs has nothing to do with the
features of the students. It's just
totally random. There are some dogs that
eat homework. Yeah. but it has nothing
to do with the features of the students
which is what we're trying to estimate.
Um but that's not that isn't necessarily
the case. You can guess where I'm going
now. Let's go back to our original DAG
and let's make it so that uh it is the
features of the students like how much
they study which influences the dogs
eating homework. Like maybe this could
go either direction, whichever sort of
fantasy story you prefer. It could be
that the really good students ignore
their dogs and don't take them for walks
and the dogs get angry and they eat
homework, right?
that'll mislead you in one direction or
could be that um could be the other
direction that the students that don't
study uh I don't know I can't come up
with a version here there's something
about that which which uh influences the
dog's behavior and makes them hungry for
paper um
>> play with the dog
>> play with the dog yeah
>> exactly yeah thank you play with the dog
with the homework exactly uh what's
important in this DAG is it's it's not
the homework itself that's influencing
the dog. We're going to do that next,
but it's not the homework itself or the
quality of the homework. That's where
we're going next. Okay, this situation
is has a backdoor path. You see it?
Yeah. Again, you're pros at D des
dpparation. You can see it. There's a
back door path. Now, we're going to need
to close that, but we can. Yeah. Um uh
if we can if if we uh can close that
back door path by conditioning on on um
uh uh things that influence the dog.
Yeah, the the missingness example. So
this is not hopeless. Um what is
hopeless? Let's go back to the original
DAG
and
imagine now that what influences the
dog, what influences missingness is the
is the homework itself. the features of
the homework. How would this happen?
Students who do bad homework feed it to
their dogs. Yeah, this is what the
teachers think every time they hear dog
ate my homework, right? Um if that's
true, this is really bad situation for
inference, right? When the outcome of
interest is influencing the missingness,
inference is extremely challenging. It's
not hopeless though. If you have a
mechanistic model of how that works, you
can do inference sometimes. And in fact,
the example I'm going to do today is an
example of that case. I chose a worst
case example to show you. And that worst
case example is survival analysis. But
in survival analysis, we can actually
save it because we have a model of how
the missingness works. At least a
sufficient model of how the missingness
works. Um
um yes. So wait, I should have done the
the summary here. Biasing path. Yeah,
dog eats conditional on homework itself.
This is this is the bad case. Um so
here's the summary slide.
Um, number one, you could say dogs eat
at random, completely at random. Uh, in
in a real data analysis case, this would
be that the missingness is just randomly
sprinkled through your table. Yeah,
maybe it's uh your research assistant um
dropped some things one day and so
there's a gap somewhere, but it has
nothing to do with the values. That's
what's important. It has nothing to do
with the measurements themselves. the
process is not guided by the things
you've measured or by um unmeasured
things in the DAG, right? Like
unmeasured confounds. Okay, that's
what's important. Um sometimes that's
credible. That's not impossible. I don't
want to demean that option. It it it's
very credible sometimes. In fact, I I
have a collaboration right now where
that's clearly the case because there
was a particular it's a time series
study and there's a particular time
where some of the people just took the
wrong measurements.
Yeah. It's a soil depth and there was
about a year period where they measured
it all at the wrong depth.
That sucks, right? [laughter] But but it
has nothing to do with the measurements
themselves or the outcomes or any of
that. It's just somebody not following
instructions. Yeah. Um the second case
being dog eats conditional on a cause uh
uh you can if you can condition on the
cause then you um uh you can rescue
yourself in this case. Uh and then the
final case the worst case scenario the
dog eats the homework itself depending
upon the features of the homework
itself. And I say this is usually
hopeless unless you can model the dog.
And this is what we're going to do in
survival analysis.
Um is this okay? Does this make some
sense? All right, this these examples
are in the book too. And in the book, I
simulate from these DAGs and run
regressions and show you the impact of
the missingness scenario. So I encourage
you to take a look at that. Okay, I
don't have time in this lecture to go
through all that, but that's what I do
in the book. Um, okay.
So now we're going to switch to the idea
of when you need to deal with missing
this, you're not just going to ignore
it. What do you do? And as basians, we
do basian imputation. Um, basian
imputation is not multiple imputation.
You may have heard of that multiple
imputation is a frequentist version of
basian imputation. It was developed by
basian don rubin uh as a quick way to do
basian imputation before markoff chains
were common but it's the theory that
justifies multiple imputation is basian.
Basian imputation is the real thing. Now
we have markoff chains we have the full
power right we just go to work on it. Uh
so it often in the uh these cases we
will we may need to imputee just for
efficiency. Um when we are going to deal
with uh missingness we've got two
computational options two strategic
modeling options and I'm going to show
you to both of them uh in the in the
context of a survival analysis uh
because they're both useful. Um the
first is is basin amputation although
I'm going to show you this one second.
uh this is when we we compute posterior
distributions for the missing values. We
replace the missing value with a
parameter. Why I'm going to say this
multiple times in this lecture? Because
in the basian framework um uh uh the
only difference between data and
parameter is that one's been observed.
Yeah, let's say that's the only
difference. There are calculation
differences, sure, but that's the
philosophical difference. And so the
same probability uh definition for a
variable say for your observed data also
applies when they're unobserved. In the
first case when you've observed the data
point we call it a likelihood or the
data model. Uh when it hasn't been
observed it's a prior but it's the same
probability expression. Why? Because it
has to be. It's the same generative
model. Just because you haven't observed
something that doesn't change the
generative model. Yeah. Again follow the
axioms. The aims will not betray you.
Yeah, they have no strategic agency.
[laughter] They're not out to get you.
The universe might be, but the axioms
are your friends. They're reliable. Uh
they may not give you what you want, but
they'll give you what you deserve.
Right? So, uh the second case, and we we
very often do this, I do this quite a
lot, is marginalization of the unknowns
of the missing values. And this is where
we we average over the distribution of
the missing values. So, we don't have to
compute them. And this is
computationally much more expedient when
you don't care about the missing values
themselves.
This is not always better though. So I'm
going to show you both and talk about
the trade-offs. And and there are many
cases where doing the imputation is
better. Uh and actually uh the
marginalization is sometimes
prohibitively difficult for numerical
reasons and the imputation is nearly
always possible but slow. Right? So
these are your trade-offs. Um but I'm
I'm going to have a summary of that
towards the end. Okay.
Um right I think I already said this.
Yeah cause once you have a causal model
of all the variables
um including the missing ones. This
implies directly a strategy for
imputation. There there are
computational obstacles. Things can be
slow. It can be hard to to make the
coding efficient. Um you have to manage
a bunch of index variables. Uh all of
that is kind of a nightmare sometimes.
But that's in software engineering and
we can do that. We can conquer that. We
do it incrementally and we test right?
We know how to do that. Um and sometimes
imputation is is unnecessary and
difficult for some algorithms in
particular discrete parameters when
they're missing. Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
will not sample discrete parameters. Uh
but there is no Markoff chain algorithm
which efficiently samples discrete
parameters because the jumps can be very
big and it's very hard for Markoff
chains to do efficient sampling when
jumps are big. Um, but we can
marginalize discrete parameters and then
imputee them postsampling. Uh, and
that's that's what we often do. There's
an example of that in the book. Um,
uh, and sometimes imputation is actually
easier than marginalization
uh, to set up when you're developing the
model. As in particular, the example I'm
going to show you with censored
observations, the imputation approach is
direct like it's just like the same
model like almost nothing changes.
whereas you have to work muck around
with a different data model for the
censored observations when you do
marginalization. So I'm going to show
you that as we go. Um the example is of
course cats. Uh oh by the way yeah I
love this cat picture. Don't you isn't
this just like the best cat? [laughter]
I mean
anyway so uh everybody who has followed
me for long knows I adore cats. So
here's a cat example. Uh these this is a
data set I downloaded from the Austin
Texas Animal Control Center uh some
years ago now. I should update this data
set. It's much bigger now, I guess. Uh
but it used to be the case that you go
to their website and they had every
animal that was admitted and released.
Um and it's not just cats. There's a
whole Noah's arc of stuff uh lizards,
everything uh that they're that they're
dealing with there. Uh skunks, just like
all kinds of stuff. So, I have
downloaded 22,356 cats that were
admitted.
And what we're going to be analyzing,
and I've paired down the data set, the
data set has a ton of columns, right?
This is a very big uh thing. Um, we're
going to be analyzing the number of days
until adoption.
And the question is whether black cats
are discriminated against. So, as you'll
know, in many societies, black cats are
considered unlucky.
Yeah. But from natural selections
perspective, they're the optimal coke
color, right? I'm gonna I'm not sure
that's true, but it's in an urban
setting probably it is, right? Any other
color is is less camouflaged? And uh um
so let's ask empirically uh do black
cats in this partic in Austin, Texas
animal control wait longer to be
adopted?
Um and there are many censored records
here. What that means is there are a lot
of cats, both black cats and other coat
colors of cats that at the time when I
downloaded this database had not yet
been adopted. But that doesn't mean they
won't be adopted. And it definitely
doesn't mean that they were adopted.
It's a missing value because the value
of interest is how long they wait until
they're adopted. Does that make sense?
Um, this is non- ignorable missing data
because the missingness is caused by the
outcome. So you have to imagine
counterfactually we could time travel
into the future and know when this cat
would be adopted. The reason we didn't
observe it adopted in the past is
because of the value of the time when it
was adopted.
Does that make sense?
Yeah. So good times, right? So this is
the bad case. This is the bad place. Um
but mechanistically we can model this
and save the day. And in fact you have
to you cannot ignore these values. And
I'm going to show you that you get a
biased estimate sometimes really like
two-fold bias in the rate of of
estimates of of adoptions.
Um, okay. Oh, I want to say yes, this
this is the placeholder cover for a book
I have just finished with uh with Andrew
Gellman and Aki Veter and a whole slew
of of co-authors who have contributed a
bunch of stuff on basian workflow. And
this black cat adoption is a case study
in the second the second half of this
book is case studies of basian workflow
and data analysis. And this is in there.
So um uh and this will be this book will
be freely available as a PDF online uh
in I don't know hopefully three months,
four months, something like that. And
hopefully we'll have a cover that looks
a little nicer at that point. But it's
done. I swear this is done. Feels good
to be free. [laughter]
No, it's this is a fun project. Anyway,
I say it's the second half of the book
is all case studies. That's there's a
huge amount of value in just going
through these case studies and AI is
going to have a website up with all the
code uh as well. Okay. Um here's part of
the data. Remember there's 22,000 more
than 22,000 cat records uh in this and
they come in lots of colors. Yeah, this
is the best censored cat image I could
find on on image search. It's very good.
So um uh so what I've done here is I
think I just randomly sampled a hundred
cats. uh each each row here is a cat and
the length of the line is the days until
adoption. The observed adoptions uh
occur where there's a point on the end,
a little circle on the end. And when
there's not a circle on the end, that's
a censored value. So I show you two
there. Black here means a black cat and
orange means every other color. It
doesn't mean orange. There are orange
cats in this data set. The the column
for for coke color is got all kinds of
crazy stuff in it. Like I had to
actually just figure out all the stuff I
would collapse to black because you know
it's somebody gets the cat and they have
to fill in the data form and they look
at the thing and they just type
something in, right? It's this is the
fun of data science. Um so there's like
smoky black, right? And I had to
collapse. I made a bunch of decisions
that you aren't seeing here, but I can
share the the original data with you
sometime if you're a massochist. Okay,
so this is what the data look like. And
we want to use these data to estimate
rates of adoption. And we want to
compare the black cats to all the other
code colors. That's the goal. Um uh of
course there's a workflow. Um what we've
talked about so far uh uh is the general
phenomenon. We've got a basic estim.
We're going to need a generative model
uh of this. We're going to build this up
or I'm going to build this up. Um and
then the sensoring model which is the
measurement model. Uh and I'm going to
of course do the proper software
engineering thing. and incrementally
develop the features for you. We're
going to go through three different
statistical models as I incrementally
develop this. Okay? And then we'll we'll
push predictions out to actually in each
step. I'm also going to do some prior
predictives in here. I should have put
that on this workflow. Okay. Uh let's do
a generative model. We're just going to
simulate some cat adoptions. Um now I
love this example because now we get to
a generative model which is not a linear
model, right? Because we've got a
mechanistic process here. We're going to
do it day by day. It's discreet rather
than continuous time because that's the
way the data set is set up, right?
Obviously, there's a time of day the cat
was adopted, but we don't have that. We
just have the day. So, I'm going to do a
generative model that's by day. So, it's
discrete time survival analysis. The two
functions I've written here, the first
one called cat adopt is a recursive
function for just simulating cat
adoptions. And the idea is there's a
constant probability on any given day
the cat is adopted depending upon its
coat color. I have um the inputs here is
is to this function is just what day
we're on so far and that the probability
of adoption. Um I've got a flag in here
if the day is greater than a thousand to
stop just in case it runs forever. Um
but that doesn't occur as long as the
probability is is reasonable sized. uh
and then I generate a random number and
if it's greater than probability of
adoption um then uh uh wait how does
this work? Yeah, then we we keep the
process going. Um and otherwise they're
adopted and we return the day. So that's
a recursive function. Those some of you
do a lot of programming recognize this
idea. There's a probability distribution
for that called the geometric
distribution and there's a function in R
for that which would which would replace
this function completely. But the rec I
like the recursive function because you
can feel the generiveness of it, right?
You see the process but uh there's an
analytical expression for the
distribution this function produces. But
I wrote the recursive one because I
thought it would be cooler because you
could see the causality better, right?
Instead of me just asserting this has a
geometric distribution and I leave it as
an exercise to the student. But uh this
the distribution this produces is called
the geometric distribution. Um and then
the second function simcats one there
will be sim cats two and sim cats three
right. Uh yesterday in my department we
talked about Lego Batman 3. I discovered
there are at least three Lego Batman. I
don't know how many there are but so
there will be three sim cats. Um and
what this does is it uses the cat adopt
function to simulate a bunch of cats.
However many you ask for. By default 10.
And you pass in this vector of two
probabilities, one for black cats and
one for all the other code colors of
probability of adoption. Um, and it just
simulates a big vector of days until
adoption with no sensoring yet. There's
no sensoring, right? This is the pure
generative model assuming all cats are
eventually adopted. Oh, I should have
said in the real data, some of the
sensoring is because the cat is still in
animal control at the time I downloaded
the data set. Other sensoring is because
the cat dies, right? Old cats can pass
away uh in animal control. And there's
also a code called escaped
and missing. Cats, they can teleport,
right? Anybody who's had a cat, you know
this is true. If I bring raw chicken
into my house, my cat immediately
teleports to my feet. Right? I've seen
it happen. Just like sparkles, he's
there. So, some of some of these cats
have teleported out of the Austin Animal
Control, and it's a code in the data
set. From our perspective, I'm going to
treat all those forms of sensoring the
same. But if you were, you could model
them as separate processes. It's like a
competing process sensoring model, and
that's a kind of survival analysis
people do. Okay,
enough of that. Okay, let's build it up.
Um, we want a statistical model to do
the estimation. Here's where the
geometric distribution appears. Um,
we're going to ignore sensoring for now.
We haven't simulated it, so that's going
to be fine. I'll say that the uh I
assert the probability that a cat waits
a cat I waits d days um and then is
adopted. So this is the probability of d
subi conditional on adoption equaling
one. So a subi is going to be my
sensoring ind my sensoring indicator
when it equals one that means they were
adopted. Yeah. uh is equal to one minus
P subc where P subC is the probability a
cat with coke color C is adopted on any
given day. Does that work with me? Yeah.
Uh raised to the power of D subi minus
one. Why? Because that's the number of
days they weren't adopted. Right? So
each day they're not adopted is
probability 1 minus P subC.
And then so you've just got a long
product of those. how many d sub i minus
one of those of one minus p because
that's the number of days they weren't
adopted and then on the last day they're
adopted and the probability of that is
is p subz so that's what's on the end
that make sense again the axums they're
your friends yeah it's a joint event we
just multiply them we just need what the
event on each day what's the probability
of what happened on each day there were
d sub i minus days where the event was
was not adopted and then finally they
were so the probability is 1 minus p to
the d uh minus 1* P. Good. Yeah. Um,
and let's do some prior predictive.
We've basically got the model, but we
need a prior, right? So, let's do some
prior predictives. And I want a prior
that does not have a bias in favor of
any particular coat color. So, I'm going
to assign the same prior distribution to
all the coat colors. And I played around
with this a little bit. I I'm not wedded
to this prior, but I want something that
is compatible with a huge range of
probabilities of adoption. Some of these
are really unrealistically fast uh as as
we'll see. But I chose a beta
distribution um with alpha equal 1 and
beta equals 10. That means it's a small
value, right? So this it's a beta
distribution where the probability mass
is towards the zero side. Yeah. Um it's
like one success in 10 failures is what
that means. If you're not experienced
with beta distributions, one day you
will have to be and you'll get used to
it. Yeah. But that's what it means. The
beta distribution is a probability
distribution for probabilities, which is
a fun thing to say, right? A probability
distribution probabilities. But sure, we
can draw probabilities from probability
distribution. Yeah, you can even draw
probability distributions from
probability distributions.
Um, there's an example of that in the
book. Okay, so good. Yeah, so they're
all over the place. This is a bunch of
separate simulations. Um, and these are
just nonparametric survival curves.
There's just empirical decays of how
many cats are still waiting to be
adopted in that simulation at each
point, but separate simulations for
black and non-black cats. Yeah.
Question.
>> I have a question. Doesn't this assume
that um days of adoption are independent
of each other? If you
>> Yes, it does. The question was um
doesn't this assume the problems of
adoption are independent? It does
transparently. I hope assume that and
that might not be the case. Yeah,
absolutely. Um, and there's also I mean
there's a bunch of stuff in this data
set that I have just not bothered to
model. So this is not if we were I was
going to really model this, I would
gradually layer in other things. Like
for example, some of these cats are
reclaimed
uh went missing and are reclaimed by
their original owners. And I'm coding
that as adoption, but it's a different
process obviously than like a stray,
right, that is captured in an alley and
then people come in shopping for a new
kitten. That's it's a completely
different process. But that's a special
code in this data set reclaimed by
owner. Uh and these are lots of these
cats are chipped, right? So, uh I think
it's the law in Germany. You have to
chip your your pets. Yeah. But there
there are no laws in the states animals.
No, there I think like California, you
have to chip your cat as well. And um so
in those cases they actually find the
owners pretty rapidly and then they come
and it it's like a week or a couple days
reclaimed by owner and I put those in
here and that's bad right because this
is a non-homogeneous process. Uh there's
a bunch of stuff like that and then
non-independence. I'm not sure what
you're thinking of but I would gladly
entertain hypotheses of such things. Um
but just bear with me on the lack of
realism so far. I want to teach you
about the missingness and how to model
it and then you I think you folks know
how to add in other complexities already
because you have the full power of
generalized linear models at your
disposal.
>> If not, we'll give a talk at a
conference someplace and I'm sure our
colleagues will inform us.
>> Yes,
>> absolutely. Okay, good with the prior
predictive. Um I encourage you to play
around with this with the code actually
and and see what you can get um uh
different kinds of things by changing
the beta.
Okay. Um,
yeah, also in the simulation there are
no cats that die. Like they have
infinite lifespan. So obviously that's
not realistic either. Okay. The first
survival model
um
we have synthetic data. So let's test it
on the test our survival model on the
simulated cat. Survival model is just
that probability before. I'll show you
some some code model code uh for it in a
moment. But you folks are really
familiar with ulam code at this point.
You just type that probability
expression. That's the model, right?
What's the probability of D? I've
already written it on the screen. You
just type it as code. Uh so this is just
to show you that the model is good at
recovering the data generating values
which we know because we we chose them.
And here is just on the left I've got a
case where black cats are adopted at a
lower probability. I set it to 0.1 um
than the other cats where I set it to
0.15. And then we have posterior
distributions. Uh and then on the right
I flipped it, right? So as I'm testing
that that um it's not pri it's not prior
sensitive which of course it won't be in
this case because the prior is symmetric
but still it's nice to you can always
make a mistake. Trust me I've made every
mistake. Um good. Yeah this is just the
you know responsible quality assurance
workflow kind of thing I want to show
you. Now we uh we've got a posterior
distributions for the probabilities but
that's very hard to interpret. We want
to push these out to predictions. So
again, I'm going to simulate using this
using the same sim cats one function. I
can just pass samples from the posterior
back into that and simulate cats and
plot their survival curves. This is very
sample size dependent what the
predictions look like because if uh if
you if you simulate a small population
of cats and the probability difference
in in probability of adoption between in
black and non-black cats isn't that big,
there's going to be lots of
stochasticity which obscures it. So
that's what I'm trying to show you on
the left. So for simulated for cohorts
of only 100 cats, there's lots of
stochasticity in the decay, but you can
kind of see that the black cats are
pushing up above the the orange trends.
Yeah, but there's a bunch of
stochasticity.
Each of those trends is 100 cats,
waiting for them all to get adopted,
right? Um if on the right, we do it for
a thousand cats. And now it's very easy
to see that there's a disadvantage. Now,
this is simulated. Uh oh, this is the
real sample. Yeah, this is the real
data. So the black cats are adopted more
slowly. It's not a huge effect, but
after a long time, it's a big
difference. Yeah, a small probability, a
small disadvantage on any given day
after many weeks and months is a big is
a big difference. Um, this is this is
quite sad. You can imagine those poor
innocent black cats sitting there and
watching the other cats leave. Poor
things. Adopt a black cat. They're
perfectly good cats. I used to have a
black cat. I love that cat very much.
Very good cat. Yeah, very good cats. And
yes, they're witches, but that just
makes them better. All right, so
here's the sensoring model. Let's put
sensoring into this. Uh,
all right. So, what we're going to
assume, and this is very important, is
that sensoring is random with respect to
the color of the cat. That's not true.
We've got really bad problems. Um but uh
uh you could imagine for example I don't
know how this would even work
mechanistically in this case but that um
um
black cats uh yeah their data is
mishandled or something like that there
would have I can't come up with a
mechanistic explanation this is a
credible assumption here um that that
censoring itself uh the the fact of
sensoring is is random with respect to
cat but the color of the cat may
influence the waiting times and
therefore the and the waiting time is
what's causing the sensoring. Yeah. So
it's not that the color of the cat
doesn't I mean the whole question is
does the color of the cat influence
waiting times but the the color of the
cat is only indirectly causing the
sensoring. It's the waiting time itself
that causes the sensoring. You feel the
difference there? You could see it in
the DAG when you draw the DAG. I should
have put the DAG on this slide. Okay.
We're going to write simcats 2. Now, sim
cats 2 is the same function as before,
but at the very bottom of it, I have
added censoring. You'll see that there's
a new argument in the in the head of the
function called sense, and I've set it
to 30. That's the number of days I'm
censoring it at. Any cat that is
unadopted by day 30, that's when we stop
observation. Right now,
[laughter] well, no, I mean, it's just
the end of observation. That's sorry.
Someone in the audience is is moving her
hand across her neck in a execution
motion. So no, that is not what I
intended. Um uh yeah, [laughter]
this is a happy day 30 event. I don't
know. But uh obviously sensoring in the
real sample is not synchronized like
this, right? It's like in the simulation
time zero is just when they come in,
right? But in the real data set, the the
dates are all staggered in the real
data. I mean, they're not all censored
at the same point like they are here,
but so this is not the the sensoring
model that's in the real data set, but
it'll it'll suffice for us to develop a
a statistical solution and it's easier
to visualize. Is this good? Yeah. So, um
here's what it looks like when you when
you simulate from this. Um on the right
there, we've got cat uh index of cat
across the bottom. I simulated a
thousand cats and then the days uh that
uh they were there until they got
adopted. And you'll notice that for this
simulation, I set the sensoring at 20.
You'll see that big line of cats at 20.
Those are all sensored values.
Okay. Um and so again, we've got two
strategies for dealing with this. This
is I hope I've convinced you you cannot
ignore this, but I'm going to show you
what happens if you do. Yeah. But you
really can't ignore this. Um uh we've
got two strategies. We can marginalize
over these missing values. I'm going to
develop that solution first. This is the
most opaque one, but it's also extremely
common. So you're going to see it quite
often. Uh and then second, we're going
to do the brute force basian approach,
which I'm a huge fan of. Um requires
less thinking uh and more computation
time. Uh and sometimes it's numerically
more stable than the marginalization
approach. Not in this particular case,
but I've I've worked on survival
analyses where the marginalization
approach, even though I could write the
correct functions, it was numerically
unstable because of the the probability
distributions involved. A gamma
distribution was the criminal in that
case. If you've ever worked with gamas,
they had nasty tails. Really hard to do
derivatives for parts of them. So, but
then I just flipped it to imputation and
it it was great. Worked fine. Um, so
it's nice to know how to do both of
these. Okay, marginalization. When we
marginalize
um in a survival analysis, we end up
using something called the CCDF. The
CCDF is the complimentary cumulative
distribution function.
Um and I I talk more about what this is
in the in the example in the book and
especially in the case study. I'll I'll
walk you up to understanding what it is.
So when we've observed an adoption uh
I've already uh uh defined that the
probability of observing an adoption on
day d is uh 1 minus p to the d minus one
* p. Okay, that's what I call the data
model. You might call the likelihood.
Yeah. Um uh this is a a the probability
of that event. It's a discrete
probability. It's not a cumulative
distribution. Yeah. It's the probability
of the data you've observed. Um, when we
haven't observed something, we want to
know the probability of getting up to
that point. So, it's like what what's
the probability that of all the cats not
having been adopted that many days. Now,
we have cumulative uh probability
distributions. But in this case, we want
the complement of it because think about
this. What's the probability? So, we
observe a cat has not been adopted in
his day D. Okay, just think about that
picture of the cat.
[laughter] Yeah, it's a cat. It's there.
It's day D. It has not been adopted. You
want to ask yourself, okay, what's the
probability of this event? Well, what
had to have happened is that um uh it
was not adopted on every day up to this
day.
And you can write that, right? It's one
minus p to the d minus one.
Yeah. Um and this is the complement of
of the cumulative uh distribution which
would be the the dis the the
proportion of cats that um were are
adopted by that day and that'll be one
minus this. Right? So if you wanted to
know how many cats will be adopted by
day D, it's one minus all of the ones
that aren't adopted, which is this
expression that's on the bottom. So this
is the complement of the cumulative
distribution because the cumulative
distribution is 1 minus 1 - p the d
minus one and this is the complement of
it because it's one minus that. So the
one minus goes away. I know it's weird
but this is this is always weird. So
it's just so when you see this
abbreviation ccdf if you do stand
programming you'll have to type that
because you'll want the complimentary
cumulative distribution function. Um, in
this case, it's discreet. So, we're
going to write it uh literally, but
that's why you'll see people talk about
the CCDF all the time. Uh, but you can
reason your way into it by just saying,
picture the cat. It's day D. It hasn't
been adopted. What have has to have
happened? Well, in every day prior, it
must not have been adopted. And then you
can write that directly. You don't have
to go through the mental gymnastics of
thinking about the cumulative
distribution and the complement of it.
Does that make some sense? Yeah. That's
just I sometimes I have to teach you
weird notation even though I hate it
because you're going to see it. Yeah.
That we often deal with these issues and
that's what the CCDF is. Okay. What
happens when we ignore sensoring? So
again simulated data where we know the
truth. This is how you test the impact
of an assumption. Um so again I've
assumed that cats are black cats are
adopted slower probability 0.1 per day.
Um this is this is order of magnitude
larger than it is in the real data by
the way right it's going to be much
smaller in the real data um and
non-black cats probability 0.15 uh and
the the solid density is there the truth
is in the high probability region of the
posterior yay basine updating works yeah
good times um
uh and then the dashed ones are where I
run the previous model uh ignoring
censoring.
Yeah. And you see what happens is it
overestimates in both cases the
probability of adoption. Let's think
through just for a second why it
overestimates
because when we ignore the censored
values,
we're ignoring longer durations.
And that leads us to think that the rate
is faster because effectively we've
thrown away the cats that waited
longest.
Does that make some sense? Yeah. There's
different kinds of sensoring. This is
this is I think called right sensoring.
Um there's also left sensoring and and
and things like that. And they they may
produce different biases. Uh but
ignoring right sensored data like this
exaggerates rates. Um and you'll see
it's a bigger effect for the black cats.
Why? Because they wait longer.
So we throw away more of them. Yeah. So
it it not only biases all your
estimates, it also biases the
difference.
Okay. Have I convinced you? Yeah. That
this is a this is a general problem.
This is the kind of general problem you
could actually prove analytically and
you can prove for simple survival
models. You can like write down
expressions about what this bias is and
stuff which is cool. But you don't need
to do that. You have the power of
simulation at your disposal. you can
always simulate out the consequences for
these things. Um, okay. In the real
data, now I fit the this model to the
real data
and uh on the left I've got ignoring
sensoring and on the right we model it.
I know these look the same. Uh, so I'm
going to try to do a trick to help you
compare them now. You just have to watch
very closely. Are you watching? All
right. Here we go.
All right. That work? Can I do it again?
All right. Again. Here we go. Yes. All
right. So, I'm sorry. This is like the
best I could do. It's it's hard to
visualize some of this stuff. Um, so
yeah, it's the same effect. Uh, when you
model sensoring, the durations are are
it's higher up on the graph because
they're longer. The waiting times become
longer. When you ignore the sensoring,
it makes you think that the adoptions
are faster because you've thrown out the
records where the cats are not yet
adopted. Make sense? Yeah. Um, and
again, in the beginning, the difference
is very small, but by the time you're
out to, you know, day 50, um, uh, it's
it's a big difference in the proportion
of cats remaining in both colors. Uh,
but the the difference between black and
and non-black cats is is basically
qualitatively the same in both models.
Yeah, black cats are still at a
disadvantage.
Good. All right, I feel like I'm on
time. Um,
now let's talk about the amputation
model. We're going to do this again with
a different computational strategy.
Uh and and one of the things about
learning this version of it is it will
hopefully help you understand the basian
framework a little better in the way it
provides solutions to measurement and
missing data problems. Here's the idea.
We're going to replace missing values
with parameters, which seems like
madness, but again, an unobserved value
in bay is just that's all the parameter
is. And sometimes those those parameters
can't be observed because they're things
like rates which are not observable.
Yeah, maybe I should explain that a
little more. Like you can't observe a
rate. You can only measure things which
let you calculate the rate. Rates are
not observable. I assert. Yeah, there's
a bunch of variables like that uh in in
stats. But there are other uh parameters
which are in principle observable but we
haven't observed them. Yeah, things that
we didn't measure but we might be able
to estimate from other things we
measured. That happens all the time. Um
and uh so missing data is of that case
where um we don't know it but we replace
it with a parameter. This is the same
thing we did with measurement error last
week, right? We tried to measure
something and we partly failed. We've
got an estimate of it. uh the true value
is a parameter that is unknown and we
can get a distribution for that unknown
true value. We can't know it for sure
but we can we can do better than the raw
measurement. Yeah. And that's the idea.
Um so we we make a a vector of
parameters one for each missing value
one parameter for each missing value.
And then we need a prior right because
you know you need a prior for every
parameter if you know nothing else about
bay. And uh where where does the prior
come from? you already have it. You have
declared the generative model and uh so
we're we're talking about something that
is in principle observable but hasn't
been observed. The prior for it is the
likelihood.
I'll just say that again and hope it
makes sense. The prior that you could
have if you had observed this thing the
probability expression is the likelihood
which we've already written. You haven't
observed it but now if you say you were
going to predict make a prediction you'd
use the same formula. you use the
likelihood and that's all that's the
prior the prior for basians the the the
likelihood is a prior for the residuals.
Yeah, that's all it is. And so we don't
need to do any further derivations.
We've already got the probability
expression and this what makes this so
comforting as an approach and easy. Um
step three, we're going to sample 22,356
parameters. Okay, good times. Uh now in
previous decades this would have been
the end of the project. Uh but these
days this is just you know 20 minutes of
your afternoon on a bad laptop.
Yeah. So it's not that big a deal
anymore. Um and then profit of course.
Yes. Um uh so let's let me draw these
ideas out a little bit more. See if I
can finish on time. Uh so for observed
duration D, the probability of the data
is just this um geometric distribution 1
- p the d minus one * p. uh that's the
likelihood or the data model. Um when
it's missing uh we have partial
information about it. It's censored at a
value D star. So we know that D is
greater than D star and we're going to
use that. So I like a little bit when we
define the prior. The prior is the same
expression but constrained to be greater
than D.
I'm going to show you in code how I do
this in a second. Okay. There's there's
different strategies. I'm going to show
you I think I've got an OLAM model and a
Stan model implementation of this to
show you the differences uh and how it
works. And I haven't showed you any
model code today because you're pros,
right? You're used to this ideas. But
I'll show it to you in a second how it
works. The script of course is on the
website already. Yeah. For running on
this whole all of the reproducing all
the plots and everything. Um we know
what do we know about the missing value?
We know it's greater than D because on
day D the cat was still there. Yeah.
It's like the counterfactual. In the
future, when will this cap be adopted?
And you're going to make a you're going
to bet on each day. That's the prior.
The prior is your bet on each day. I
don't usually like the betting framework
for bays. There's a whole like
philosophy of bays which is about
betting. And I don't usually like that,
but here is a metaphor. I think it maybe
it motivates the solution. Um, that's
what we know. And we also know that on
each of those days greater than d, the
probability is 1 - p to the d minus 1 *
p. It's exactly the same thing.
Yeah. Does this make some sense? Yeah.
Isn't this cool? Like this these are
routine problems. Measurement error,
missing data. Um this kind of direct
solution is great because if you try to
do this outside of bays, it it gets very
difficult because you can't use inverse
probability. You can't assign
probability distributions to parameters
in if you're a frequentist. And that
causes lots of problems. Um basians are
just like ah trust the axioms. Let's see
what happens. Right? We're very
permissive. Uh the the Church of Bays is
very like we believe in the axioms and
then we let a thousand flowers bloom,
right? This sort of thing. Of course,
you've got to test and validate and be
transparent about your assumptions, but
we don't put philosophical constraints
on what you're allowed to do with the
axioms. Um we're a big church. You can
do frequencies calculations. No problem.
Frequencies, those are things we
calculate, right? It's just it's
perfectly fine. Um anyway, does this
make sense as a as a as a perspective?
Um, okay. Here's the ulam implementation
that I came up with. Uh, uh, two lines,
the the first two lines in the formula
list. There's some conditional notation
I need to explain. I don't think I've
used this before uh, this year in this
course, but this is in the book as well
when I do a couple of models in the
second half of the book. We're we've got
I'm using custom distributions which
just inject code into the stand. Uh this
just lets me write any arbitrary
likelihood that I like and that's what
I've done here. So I'm saying um uh the
probability um uh a cat is when the cat
is adopted adopted equals 1 is uh the
log probability is what goes in custom.
It's just the log of the geometric
distribution for the days observed at
that point. This is the same formula
that I had on the previous slides. So
those are the observed cases, right? So
this is just a way in ulam to write an
arbitrary likelihood just takes that
code and dumps it straight in stan. Um
and then the second line is the censored
cases. So adopted equals zero
conditional on that we use the same
formula but I've replaced days I which
remember is is is not been observed
right because days till adoption is the
thing that we'd want in this formula. we
replace it with a parameter called days
impute
and then the prior on days impute is
just uniform with a lower bound days
which remember is a vector. So for each
cat
uh its prior for its imputed days starts
on how long we observed it and then I
just put in an arbitrary upper limit of
2,00 which is big enough to deal with
all the cats in the in the example. Um
uh and then I have the same prior on um
uh on the colors as before. So we've put
the prior information we have which is
the likelihood because that's the prior
that's the second line of this model
formula. And then the third line puts
the constraint that it be greater than
the observed days so far. Does that make
sense?
And this will do it. Um that's a lot of
it's a lot of cats though. That's that's
22,000 uh parameters and we declare them
even for the ones that were observed to
be adopted. But, you know, the computer
can handle it. That's no problem. And um
uh this runs just fine. I'll show you
the results in a moment. I think it
might help to show you what the stand
code looks like. Um this is not the
stand code produced by Ulam. This is my
manicured stand code version of it. Uh
that's a little bit better because I get
to inject the observed values back into
the parameter vector. Um so what's going
on here? If you haven't worked with raw
stan code before, uh it's very much like
Ulam code. It's just all Ulam does is
automate these top two blocks or
sometimes more top blocks if you have
them. Uh
the top block declares the observed
variables. We usually call those data.
Yeah. Uh where n is the number of of
cats uh in the data set and then whether
or not they're adopted and then the days
and then their colors and then the
parameters are the unobserved variables.
We have two we have a vector of length
two for the probability of adoption P
and then we have a vector of length N
which is the number of cats called days
imputed and the lower bound is days. So
this is just in raw stand notation the
way to declare a uniform prior
probability on this but this has no
upper bound except infinity right which
is a little bit more comforting.
Yeah, that doesn't occur in the data
set, right? And we're not going to
sample that either. Um, and then the
model block uh uses the likelihood
again. You'll see here we've got this
days impute vector and then we use the
same likelihood down here. Uh, in the
case of non-adoption, you see there's
this if then branch. Let me remove the
boxes for a second in the model block.
If adopted I equals 1, then we just do a
target update using the geometric
distribution. And then there's this
trick where I copy the observed days
into days imputed. Right? This is
optional. It's just a trick because I'm
going to show you in a graph later which
ones are observed or not. You don't have
to do that. Um and then uh else uh
adopted I equals Z. We use the same
expression but we replace days with days
imputed just like in the model. And
that's it. That's basic imputation. Very
straightforward. Yeah.
>> My naive assumption would be that the
parameter days could just be like days
plus one would be the most probable.
>> It's the most probable, but we want the
probability of every
>> Okay.
>> Right. And it's there's a geometric
distribution over the days above day D.
>> Right? So it does decay into the future,
which is why infinity doesn't isn't
relevant. Uh no cat will wait infinity
days. Well, if you have infinite cats,
uh, at least one of them await infinity
days. Yeah, [laughter] but with
probability one, but we don't need to
worry about that problem. Uh, but you're
right, your intuition is right. But we
want the distribution. We don't want the
m the the most likely one. Yeah. Okay.
And we're going to get posterior
distributions. And I'm going to show
them to you in a second. Okay. Well, I'm
going to I'm going to show them to you
as intervals because there's a bunch of
them. All right. So So, uh, yes. Um uh
data visualization is my passion.
[laughter]
This is really excellent. So this is the
when you plot precy for this model. This
is what you get. Isn't that great? Okay.
So every row here is a is a days imputed
and for a different cat. And there's
yeah uh a lot of them. 22,000 of them to
be exact. Let me zoom in a bit. All
right. Well, that just makes it worse,
doesn't it? This is just really
terrible. All right, what's going on
here? Um, so across the horizontal is
days. This is in unit days. This is
synthetic data where I've made sensoring
always happen at day 20. So, and the
points uh left of day 20 are the
observed values which I just copied into
the vector of parameters. There was that
line where I just said it's normal
observed days with a standard deviation
of 01. that just fixes the parameter
estimate at the observed value. Just a
trick so I can make this graph, right?
You don't have to do that. Um, so on the
left of 20, those are the observed
values that were simulated. And on the
right are the posterior distributions
for the days how long the cats would
wait that had not yet who were censored,
right? And there's really only two
posterior distributions here because
there's one for each color type. there's
sampling variation. So they look at
their intervals look a little different.
But you'll see that the posterior means
at the points there's really two
categories because there's only two
there's only two likelihoods, right? If
you stratified the cats by more features
of the cats, you get more variation in
these posteriors which welcome to do in
the raw data. There's lots of things
they know about these cats. There's age
estimates which almost certainly has an
effect on this, right? Other things that
go on. Does this make sense? Yeah. So
this addresses your question a lot,
Connor. It's Yes. on the far left. It's
maximized there, but then it decays
geometrically, literally geometrically,
and the mean is pretty far from the
maximum. So, if you're going to say
what's the expectation, you'd be a fool
to bet on D plus one. Does that make
sense? Again, the gambling metaphor is
not usually my preference, but maybe in
this case, it makes sense. It seems a
bit macob to bet on how long a cat will
wait to adoption. This is like that's
like prediction markets for that seem
terrible. Yeah. Um, good.
All right. Um, oh wait, I'm kind of on
time. This is amazing. Okay, so let me
let me uh try to summarize this. Why
impute? Um,
marginalizing out missing values is is
faster if you can do it, but it's opaque
in the coding and you have to do some
extra derivation and sometimes that
derivation is difficult, right? Or the
algorithm that's needed to do it can be
quite opaque uh and difficult to get to
work. Uh there's a family of extremely
useful models called hidden marov models
which are a kind of missing data model.
Uh because in a hidden marov model the
states of the system that you'd like to
know are are not measured. They may not
be observable but sometimes they are
observable but you just don't have them.
And the data you have are called
emissions from those states. But
different states can produce similar
emissions but with different
probabilities. Um, it's used a lot in
animal movement models, like where's the
shark,
right? And you're getting periodic
satellite pings of the radio track
shark. So, you don't always know where
it is and there's measurement error. Uh,
so it's a hidden marov thing. And you're
trying to estimate not just the position
of the shark, but what it's doing. Is it
feeding? Is it resting? Things like
that. Those are hidden states. So,
hidden marov models used a lot um not
just with sharks. Uh, I have a a
colleague, a co-author on the basin
workflow book. This is what she does.
She does hidden markup models of sharks.
Um, Vienna on the cover and um, uh, it's
a really cool there's a case study in
the in the basing workflow book for
shark movement when it comes out. You'll
like it. But uh, in those models there's
an algorithm for doing the
marginalization and it's a mess. Like it
works like there's nothing wrong with it
but you don't want to write it yourself.
Luckily there's a stand function that
does it for you. Uh, but that's that's a
kind of obstacle if you have to develop
something like that for yourself. it's
non-trivial thing to do. Um, and
sometimes marginalization is numerically
unstable. As I said, I had a project
where there were gamma distributed
survivals and I just couldn't get it to
be numerically stable. I flipped it to
doing imputation and it ran no problem,
right? It seems crazy. I'm going to
invent, you know, tens of thousands of
parameters and things will be easier.
But, you know, the universe is weird
like that. Yeah. So, it's nice to know.
Um, imputation is slow, but it's very
transparent. it's easier to read the
code and understand what's going on once
you get past the philosophical weirdness
of of declaring parameters for missing
values. Um, it also gives you estimates
for the missing values, which in
marginalization doesn't. And sometimes
that's the goal. Like you really want to
know those estimates. In this case, it's
not, but sometimes that really is the
goal. Um, ecologists uh use something
called occupancy models quite a lot. You
want to know if an animal is there in a
patch. Um, but the problem is that
there's a detection probability. Many
animals are cryptic. They don't want you
to see them. So zeros are a mixture of
absence and measurement error. That's
called the occupancy model. It's the
most basic statistical problem in
ecology and it's a mixture model. It's
already hard. Sometimes the occupancy is
the thing you want to know, right? But
you can't observe it and you need a
posterior distribution for it. So
imputing it is essential in a model like
that. Does that make sense?
>> Yeah.
models. If one
woman
>> Yes. Absolutely. Absolutely. Absolutely.
Great example. Yeah. Yeah. There's an
example. Sorry, the microphone won't
pick you up, I don't think, so I'll I'll
repeat it. Yeah. An example of fertility
modeling. If you have a woman that's
only experienced part of her fertility,
>> right, and you want to know her total
fertility in her lifetime, this is a
missing value and and you need to impute
that to do the regression for lifetime
effects and things like that. Yeah.
You've worked on a bunch of these
problems. I know. Yeah. Yeah. It's a
great example. Um, sorry, I've gone over
two minutes somehow in my enthusiasm.
I'm sorry. Anyway, I'm going to stop
here. Um, uh, there's more examples of
missing values stuff in the chapter in
the book and in the previous year's
lectures as well. And if you ever have a
problem like this, you're welcome to
come to me and ask for help on it. I'm
very passionate about missing data.
Thanks for your attention today.